---
layout: post
title: "IDA"
modified:
categories: posts
excerpt: Intent-driven design
tags: [ida, intent,design]
image:
  feature:
date: 2015-03-25T10:03:05-04:00
share: true
comments: true
---

#IDA: Intent-driven applications. 

I have been thinking about IDA for some time now. The idea is still very fresh and requires some refinement. This is why I think writing about it in a blog might actually bring some clarity for me.


## Motivation

Fo me, the idea is inspired by a stage production in Broadway musicals, where a single stage is adopted according to the context of the plot. With IDA business owner will be able to serve content to their customers relevant to their intent, which will lead greater user experience and higher conversion rate for the business.

As I explorer the net, I discovered a number of people have thought about a similar proposition.


# There is nothing new under the sun...

As more users continue to engage with technology, software engineers and designers are looking for ways to make UXs smoother and more intuitive as possible. 

The evolution of smart devices has pushed the web design towards a responsive design. 

### Responsive-design 

Design approach that adjusts to its environment. Web has been really good at adopting the responsive design. Responsive __Web__ design  uses existing CSS techniques to allow content to be *responsive* (adjust) accordingly to any medium  used to access it, e.g., mobile phone browser, smart-watch, different size tv.

The responsive design has allowed for the content to fit the medium. The next step is for it to also blend into the context as well.

Few people, are thinking about it as well, [Jeff Fuhriman](http://blogs.adobe.com/digitalmarketing/author/jeff-fuhriman/) from Adobe, [wrote](http://blogs.adobe.com/digitalmarketing/personalization/behavior-driven-design-integrating-user-intent-with-responsive-experiences/) in 2013! "Think Behavior, Not Only Devices"  and calls for Behaviour-driven responsive design.

> Behavior-driven responsive design seeks to understand the visitor’s needs and intent and to use this information to influence the order and emphasis of content, navigation, and design aesthetic

Jeff also cites Valle Hansen's [post](http://designforuse.net/responsive-design/behavior-driven-responsive-design-making-responsive-work-harder/) who also iterates the importance for services to act on users' intent.

Doc Searls, wrote a [book](http://www.amazon.com/The-Intention-Economy-Customers-Charge/dp/1422158527) about the benefits of what he calls "The Intention Economy".

> an economy driven by consumer intent, where vendors must respond to the actual intentions of customers instead of vying for the attention of many. --- [Amazon review](http://www.amazon.com/The-Intention-Economy-Customers-Charge/dp/1422158527)

Although, Doc was discussing the idea in a more broader sense, it still comes down to how we build systems that react to users' intentions.

It's important to incorporate the User into the this loop--either explicitly, by allowing an user to specify his intent, or by figuring his intent from the information he provides. Note, I didn't mention users' actions. These are fairly straightforward. You click on "Buy" or "Browse", I know which page to show you. It's the page before you actually did anything on the website, which is the important one. 

Today website are full with content. It takes a significant chunk of time for use to navigate through them. Try Amazon. The sheer number of categories and subcategories will drive you nuts. Sometimes, you don't even know what you are looking for, maybe it's a gift. In this case, the website is powerless, beyond having a subsection of generic gifts ideas. 

Both consumer and the service providers can benefits from having a simple conversation-"What are you after?". It will cut the crap, so to speak.

Valle Hanssen, seems to agree

> Practically speaking, if I go to Gap.com on my desktop, I’m probably browsing for new jeans, and I’m probably buying them too. If I go to Gap.com on my smartphone, I’m likely trying to find the bricks-and-mortar store that’s closest to me, or access my store’s hours. In that case, I don’t want to sift through all of Gap.com’s content to get to the store locator on my smartphone; I want my smartphone to assume the store locator is one of my main goals, and make that a priority over other things like browsing for jeans.

Everyone seems to see the benefit of it, however, we are yet to see are implementation of it. Meanwhile, the giants of the Internet are fighting over customers. They sift through personal information in order to get insight into our intents and customise their service accordingly. Despite an incredible progress in Big Data analytics and prediction algorithms, these still remain, to my mind, very crud methods.

I think the problem lies in the fact that both the designer and the software engineer have the tools to translate these "insights" on to the app/web/service itself. Figuring out the insight and reacting to it are independent processes. The insight is retrieved by scientist, applying sofisticated algorithms, while software is written and websites are built by software engineers and designer. It's very static approach and not really in the spirit of the "response design" framework. I think, a big of why responsive design works (largely) is because we provide the designer the tools/frameworks to incorportae inside the product. 

I think similar frameworks/tools supporting intent-driven design process should appear very soon.

## IDA library

We propose a library package that will help web developers design intent-driven UX. The layout/functionality will adjust itself to the different user intents e.g., browse, buy, learn, view etc, with a nice transition between intents. 
